Obviously plenty of differences in characters and plot. In fact, only Notosia, whose history was much more fleshed-out in the short story, goes without major alterations. Halferne as Hei Gezi (The Black Dove) is switched to Halferne The Raven (different black bird) for the novel, and Hei Gezi becomes Ursza’s gender-neutral Alter-Ego, as I kept Ursza’s martial nature hidden for the first two acts of the story. Halferne is essentially trying to fulfill Saleh’s role in uniting the agreeable factions and eliminating the corrupt ones. His plan was to leave with Ursza once it was all done

Clay was changed from an entrenched rebel to a visiting spy after I read a bunch of Jack Higgins, Tom Clancy, Robert Ludlum, and the entire John Gardner James Bond run and decided there could be spies in my future, but they might be different from 21st-century spies. I invented Ness (named after Eliot Ness of the Untouchables) as the anti-Bond girl. Late-middle-aged, blue-collar, street tough, not glamorous. As an outsider, Clay couldn’t dump lore the way he could as a rebel. With Ness, he could ask questions and naturally get the essential lore through dialogue as it became important. In the short story, Clay just dumps the history of Notosia in the opening scene while he walks through the market on his way to meet Ursz, little of which is necessary, and all of which precedes the start of the action (I’ve learned since then). Also, at this point, I switched from first person to third person mostly because Clay sets the foil with the cipher early in the story, and it seemed like cheating if I was in his thoughts for the entire book, so I skipped that rather important one for the sake of surprising the reader.

Ursza is the biggest character change. As the rebel/warrior archetype, I considered basically making her rebel from Gu’Senlin discipline on her own and just be an amoral mercenary. Once she joins the Perichore, the other memories of Rik and Ursza would make her rethink her life choices. Later, I decided the interesting thing about the six Perichore was that these things DIDN’T happen, and that there was more drama in constantly making them figure out Gestalt while maintaining their own personalities. To that end, I invented the Shard concept and had her secretly brainwashed, and visibly a “helpless drug addict.” This also allowed me to develop themes and characters centered on honor, duty, and limitations. 

Honestly, I never found a theme for the short story. I was hoping one would emerge as I wrote. This is usually a sign that I will not finish the story since most of my scenes and characters directly relate to the theme. No theme means no ideas for characters or scenes.